Rewrite mtls migration instructions. (#6589)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/tasks/security/authentication/mtls-migration/index.md

    - /docs/tasks/security/mtls-migration/
---

> This task shows how to ensure your workloads only communicate in mutual TLS as they are migrated to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This task shows how to ensure your workloads only communicate using mutual TLS as they are migrated to
```

Istio.

> Istio by default automatically configures workloads between sidecars in [mutual TLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#auto-mutual-tls). By default, Istio configures workloads as `PERMISSIVE` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio automatically configures workload sidecars to use [mutual TLS](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy/#auto-mutual-tls) when calling other workloads. By default, Istio configures the destination workloads using `PERMISSIVE` mode.
```

> When `PERMISSIVE` mode is enabled, a service can take both plain text and mutual TLS traffic. In order to only allow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `PERMISSIVE` mode is enabled, a service can accept both plain text and mutual TLS traffic. In order to only allow
```

> mutual TLS traffic, we need to change to `STRICT` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mutual TLS traffic, the configuration needs to be changed to `STRICT` mode.
```

You can use the [Grafana dashboard](/docs/tasks/observability/metrics/using-istio-dashboard/) to
check which workloads are still sending plaintext traffic to the workloads in `PERMISSIVE` mode and choose to lock
them down once the migration is done.

## Before you begin

<!-- TODO: update the link after other PRs are merged -->

* Understand Istio [authentication policy](/docs/concepts/security/#authentication-policies) and related [mutual TLS authentication](/docs/concepts/security/#mutual-tls-authentication) concepts.

* Read the [authentication policy task](/docs/tasks/security/authentication/authn-policy) to
  learn how to configure authentication policy.

* Have a Kubernetes cluster with Istio installed, without global mutual TLS enabled (e.g use the demo configuration profile as described in [installation steps](/docs/setup/getting-started).

> In this section, you can try out the migration process by creating sample workloads and modifying

Reviewer: Make the following change and then move this sentence up before line 21.
```suggestion
In this task, you can try out the migration process by creating sample workloads and modifying
```

the policies to enforce STRICT mutual TLS between the workloads.

## Set up the cluster

> * Create the following namespaces and deploy [httpbin]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/httpbin) and [sleep]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/sleep) with sidecars on both of them.

Reviewer: I would suggest changing lines 37-53 to the following:
```
* Create two namespaces, `foo` and `bar`, and deploy [httpbin]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/httpbin) and [sleep]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/sleep) with sidecars on both of them:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl create ns foo
    $ kubectl apply -f <(istioctl kube-inject -f @samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml@) -n foo
    $ kubectl apply -f <(istioctl kube-inject -f @samples/sleep/sleep.yaml@) -n foo
    $ kubectl create ns bar
    $ kubectl apply -f <(istioctl kube-inject -f @samples/httpbin/httpbin.yaml@) -n bar
    $ kubectl apply -f <(istioctl kube-inject -f @samples/sleep/sleep.yaml@) -n bar
    {{< /text >}}

* Create another namespace, `legacy`, and deploy [sleep]({{< github_tree >}}/samples/sleep) without a sidecar:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl create ns legacy
    $ kubectl apply -f @samples/sleep/sleep.yaml@ -n legacy
    {{< /text >}}
```

Author: done.

> text to mutual TLS without breaking live traffic.

Author: good point. reworded. and next paragraph as well. ptal.

* Have a Kubernetes cluster with Istio installed, without global mutual TLS enabled (e.g use the demo configuration profile as described in

> [installation steps](/docs/setup/getting-started), or set the `global.mtls.enabled` installation option to false).

Author: i'm fine with that.

caveat though: a install with  `global.mtls.enabled=true` does not work with this user guide. Do we really want to assume they know that and figure it out?

no peer authn by default installation is also the case, but we still give `kubectl get crd` to be more hermetic and let the doc robust.

deprecation something else seems related but a bit off scope of the pr.

i can make the change by removing that if you feel strong about this. just some thought.

> [installation steps](/docs/setup/getting-started), or set the `global.mtls.enabled` installation option to false).

Reviewer 2: That's why I want to hide that option. I already start removing this in other places. We may need to add the note somewhere to say this option is deprecated and recommend to install Istio regularly then add mesh policy (as in this guide)

> [installation steps](/docs/setup/getting-started), or set the `global.mtls.enabled` installation option to false).

Author: removed.

* Verify setup by sending an http request (using curl command) from any sleep pod (among those in namespace `foo`, `bar` or `legacy`) to `httpbin.foo`.  All requests should success with HTTP code 200.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ for from in "foo" "bar" "legacy"; do for to in "foo" "bar"; do kubectl exec $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -n ${from} -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name}) -c sleep -n ${from} -- curl http://httpbin.${to}:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "sleep.${from} to httpbin.${to}: %{http_code}\n"; done; done
    sleep.foo to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.foo to httpbin.bar: 200
    sleep.bar to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.bar to httpbin.bar: 200
    sleep.legacy to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.legacy to httpbin.bar: 200
    {{< /text >}}

> * Also verify that there are no authentication policies or destination rules (except control plane's) in the system:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Also verify that there are no authentication policies or destination rules (except control plane ones) in the system:
```

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get peerauthentication --all-namespaces
    No resources found
    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get destinationrule --all-namespaces
    No resources found
    {{< /text >}}

## Lock down to mutual TLS by namespace

> After migrating all clients to Istio and injecting the Envoy sidecar, we can lock down workloads in `foo` namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After migrating all clients to Istio and injecting the Envoy sidecar, you can lock down workloads in the `foo` namespace
```

to only accept mutual TLS traffic.

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -n foo -f - << EOF
apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
kind: "PeerAuthentication"
metadata:
  name: "default"
spec:
  mtls:
    mode: STRICT
EOF
{{< /text >}}

Now, you should see the request from `sleep.legacy` to `httpbin.foo` failing.

{{< text bash >}}
$ for from in "foo" "bar" "legacy"; do for to in "foo" "bar"; do kubectl exec $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -n ${from} -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name}) -c sleep -n ${from} -- curl http://httpbin.${to}:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "sleep.${from} to httpbin.${to}: %{http_code}\n"; done; done
sleep.foo to httpbin.foo: 200
sleep.foo to httpbin.bar: 200
sleep.bar to httpbin.foo: 200
sleep.bar to httpbin.bar: 200
sleep.legacy to httpbin.foo: 000
command terminated with exit code 56
sleep.legacy to httpbin.bar: 200
{{< /text >}}

> If you can't migrate all your services to Istio (injecting Envoy sidecar), you have to stay at `PERMISSIVE` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you can't migrate all your services to Istio (i.e., inject Envoy sidecar in all of them), you will need to continue to use `PERMISSIVE` mode.
```

However, when configured with `PERMISSIVE` mode, no authentication or authorization checks will be performed for plaintext traffic by default.
We recommend you use [Istio Authorization](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-http/) to configure different paths with different authorization policies.

> ## Lock down mutual TLS for entire mesh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Lock down mutual TLS for the entire mesh
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -n istio-system -f - << EOF
apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
kind: "PeerAuthentication"
metadata:
  name: "default"
spec:
  mtls:
    mode: STRICT
EOF
{{< /text >}}

> Now you can see both `foo` `bar` namespaces enforcing mutual TLS only traffic, thus requests from `sleep.legacy`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, both the `foo` and `bar` namespaces enforce mutual TLS only traffic, so you should see requests from `sleep.legacy`
```

> failing at both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
failing for both.
```

{{< text bash >}}
$ for from in "foo" "bar" "legacy"; do for to in "foo" "bar"; do kubectl exec $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -n ${from} -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name}) -c sleep -n ${from} -- curl http://httpbin.${to}:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "sleep.${from} to httpbin.${to}: %{http_code}\n"; done; done
{{< /text >}}

## Clean up the example

> To remove all resources created in this section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove all resources created in this task:
```

* Verify setup by sending an http request (using curl command) from any sleep pod (among those in namespace `foo`, `bar` or `legacy`) to `httpbin.foo`.  All requests should success with HTTP code 200.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ for from in "foo" "bar" "legacy"; do for to in "foo" "bar"; do kubectl exec $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -n ${from} -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name}) -c sleep -n ${from} -- curl http://httpbin.${to}:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "sleep.${from} to httpbin.${to}: %{http_code}\n"; done; done
    sleep.foo to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.foo to httpbin.bar: 200
    sleep.bar to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.bar to httpbin.bar: 200
    sleep.legacy to httpbin.foo: 200
    sleep.legacy to httpbin.bar: 200
    {{< /text >}}

* Also verify that there are no authentication policies or destination rules (except control plane's) in the system:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get peerauthentication --all-namespaces
    No resources found
    {{< /text >}}

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get destinationrule --all-namespaces
    No resources found
    {{< /text >}}

> ## Lock down to mutual TLS

Reviewer 2: Per other discussion, Samrat suggests not using this phrase *lock down*. *Stricly require mutual TLS*, may be?

Also, mention namespace to avoid confusion with the next section. Though I think we can also collapsed into one (just show at mesh or namespace level and leave the other as exercise)

Author: referred the ns to avoid confusion.

i'll defer terminology swap to future iteration. whoever feel strong about it can drive it. we get the doc accurate to impl first.

{{< text bash >}}
$ for from in "foo" "bar" "legacy"; do for to in "foo" "bar"; do kubectl exec $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -n ${from} -o jsonpath={.items..metadata.name}) -c sleep -n ${from} -- curl http://httpbin.${to}:8000/ip -s -o /dev/null -w "sleep.${from} to httpbin.${to}: %{http_code}\n"; done; done
sleep.foo to httpbin.foo: 200
sleep.foo to httpbin.bar: 200
sleep.bar to httpbin.foo: 200
sleep.bar to httpbin.bar: 200
sleep.legacy to httpbin.foo: 000
command terminated with exit code 56
sleep.legacy to httpbin.bar: 200
{{< /text >}}

If you can't migrate all your services to Istio (injecting Envoy sidecar), you have to stay at `PERMISSIVE` mode.
However, when configured with `PERMISSIVE` mode, no authentication or authorization checks will be performed for plaintext traffic by default.
We recommend you use [Istio Authorization](/docs/tasks/security/authorization/authz-http/) to configure different paths with different authorization policies.

### Lockdown mutual TLS for entire mesh

{{< text bash >}}
$ kubectl apply -n istio-system -f - << EOF
apiVersion: "security.istio.io/v1beta1"
kind: "PeerAuthentication"
metadata:
  name: "default"
spec:
  mtls:
    mode: STRICT
EOF

> {{ /text }}

Reviewer: This is breaking the preview:
```suggestion
{{< /text >}}
```
